LIFE IS A VIDEO GAME—HERE ARE THE CHEAT CODES
March 30, 201716 minute readby Mark Manson

https://markmanson.net/life-cheat-codes

How to Win at Life

The goal of Life is simple: it is to Level Up as much as possible. Each Level in life presents a particular challenge that you must overcome. Once you overcome that challenge, you get to move on to the next Level. The goal is to complete as many levels as possible. At the end of the game, the person at the highest level gets to have the best funeral.

There are five levels in life:

Level 1 – Find food; find a bed to sleep in at night

Level 2 – Know you’re not going to die
- Level 2 requires that you find a secure and stable home to base yourself out of.

Level 3 – Find your people
- Level 3 means relationships, finding the right people to love and the right people who love you.

Level 4 – Do something that’s important and valuable to both yourself and others
- Level 4 means building up some skill or knowledge or ability that adds value to the world around you and also makes you feel like kind of a badass in the process.

Level 5 – Create a legacy
- Level 5 just means making sure your life mattered when you’re dead. Good luck with that champ.


THE DESIGN OF LIFE

1. Life is designed to continually throw difficult and unexpected problems at you.
the purpose of Life is not to control what happens to you, but rather control and choose higher level reactions to what happens to you.

2. Players may respond to problems with either Solutions or Distractions.
Solutions are actions and pursuits that resolve a problem preventing it from continuing or happening again in the future. Distractions are actions or pursuits designed to either make the Player unaware of the problem’s existence or to dull the pain the problem may be causing.

If a Player feels they understand a problem and are capable of handling it, they will pursue a Solution. If players are just sick of Life’s shit, then they will likely pursue Distractions to help them pretend the problem isn’t actually there.

3. The more each Solution or Distraction is used, the easier and more automatic it will be in the future.
Once a Solution or Distraction is unconscious and automatic, it becomes a Habit.

4. Solutions move us towards the next Level, Distractions keep us on the same Level.

5. The formula for winning at the game of Life is therefore actually incredibly simple:

a) correctly identify your Solutions and Distractions
b) eliminate the Distractions
c) ????
d) profit

One simple example: There’s a problem at work and my boss hates me, so I can either pursue a Solution (confront my boss, look to be transferred, work harder, etc.) or I can pursue a Distraction (party every night, smoke crack, masturbate while watching Disney cartoons, etc.).


CHEATS

CHEAT #1: I AM RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS
You can always do something about the problems Life gives you.

And if you limit your responses to Distractions enough, pretty soon you will build a Life that is made up of nothing but Habits of Distractions. You’ll be running away from everything, and everyone, all the time. And you’ll probably turn into a grade-A selfish prick at that.


CHEAT #2: WRITE THIS SHIT DOWN
One common way to do this is to write down your thoughts regularly.

CHEAT #3: STOP FUCKING COMPLAINING
People complain not because something sucks. People complain because they’re looking for empathy and to feel connected with those around them.

CHEAT #4: STOP FANTASIZING
Fantasies are like any other Distraction – they are to be used sparingly and for nothing other than pure enjoyment. It’s when they begin to sustain your sense of self-worth, your desire for importance in this world, that you will be hobbling yourself, and you will never Level Up again in Life.

CHEAT #5: SHARE YOUR SHAME
that there is something inherently flawed or wrong about us and we must hide it from other people at all costs.

The best way to get rid of our Distractions and to reclaim the problems that have been haunting us since childhood is to expose them, to share them, and recognize that 
a) no, you’re not a freak, most people struggle(d) with the same problem,
and 
b) that your Distractions are just that: unhealthy ways to compensate for how shitty you feel about yourself.

There’s an old saying that “sunlight is the best disinfectant.” Well, that’s true for ourselves as well. The only way to cure the darkest parts of yourself is to shine light on them.

=====

The difficulty is not winning, but knowing what winning itself means. 

Because that’s the real challenge: deciding what our own life is worth and then having the courage to go out and live it.

