6 Things Every Mentor Should Do

in LEADERSHIP & MANAGING PEOPLE
by Vineet Chopra, MDSanjay Saint, MD
MARCH 29, 2017

1. Choose Mentees Carefully

2. Establish a Mentorship Team  

3. Run a Tight Ship  
Establishing firm and clear ground rules with mentees can improve efficiency.

To begin, clarify what your mentee expects from the relationship, match it against your expectations, and reach consensus.

In our experience, the most successful relationships are ones where the mentee fully understands and shares their mentor’s vision for success.

Establish a cadence for communication.

Finally, make it clear that accountability isn’t optional. Effective mentors educate mentees about the standards of the profession — and ensure they live up to them. 

Deadlines must be honored, commitments to projects kept, and appointment times adhered to.

They should expect and welcome constructive criticism. Mentees must also understand that repeating the same mistakes is unacceptable and that a single egregious error, such as data fabrication or plagiarizing, may end the relationship — or worse.

4. Head Off Rifts…or Resolve Them 

Mentors must recognize that disagreements and misunderstandings are almost inevitable in these relationships and that the mentor, not the mentee, is responsible for avoiding or repairing rifts.

Smart mentors do not allow sores to fester or spats to escalate.
They intervene early to keep the relationship on track.

For instance, in the second example above, the mentor could have created an open, cards-on-the-table relationship that would have encouraged the mentee to be more honest about their needs, or at least inquired about the underlying issues behind the mentee’s challenges before suggesting a leave of absence.


5. Don’t Commit Mentorship Malpractice
- Insisting that your mentees advance your projects rather than allowing them to develop their own work
- Allowing mentees to repeat common self-destructive mistakes — what we call “mentee missteps” — without reining in such behavior


6. Prepare for the Transition

A mentor’s accumulated wisdom and expertise must be passed on to the next generation. Good mentors make this process conscious, discussing challenges and satisfactions of mentorship with mentees.

Here’s how a colleague described her experience:

“When we took on another fellow, my mentor was swamped. He asked me if I was ready to be the new fellow’s primary mentor. I knew how my mentor went about mentoring me, felt ready, and agreed to do it.” As it turned out, her mentor had her back. “I shouldn’t have worried. He immediately suggested to serve as a co-mentor, ensuring I was comfortable in the role while guiding and grooming our fellow. As co-mentor, he gave me feedback about how best to run meetings with my mentor, provide advice on work-life balance, ensure discipline, and identify growth opportunities. He showed me just how much joy mentoring can bring.” This, perhaps, is the most valuable lesson of them all.


https://hbr.org/2017/03/6-things-every-mentor-should-do?utm_source=pocket&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=pockethits
